# Activity Pub

The Social Inbox implements the [ActivityPub
specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/activitypub/)'s dynamic parts,
such as handling incoming notifications, follow requests, likes, boosts,
and sending out notifications, as well as related specifications, like
[Webfinger](https://webfinger.net/)

## Inbox

The [Inbox](https://www.w3.org/TR/activitypub/#inbox) receives
activities from other actors and remote instances, such as Like,
Announce, Follow, and replies in the form of Create and Update.

Depending on your blocklist and allowlist, activities may be put on
pause, accepted or rejected.

The Inbox is a paginated collection that holds any activity received and
stored, irrespective of their paused/approved status.  Only query the
Inbox to check what activities are there.

Rejected activities are currently not stored anywhere.

Example: [https://social.distributed.press/v1/@distributed@distributed.press/inbox](https://social.distributed.press/v1/@distributed@distributed.press/inbox)

## Outbox (notifications)

To notify followers of your activities, send them as a POST request to
your outbox.

## Followers

The [Followers](https://www.w3.org/TR/activitypub/#followers) collection
contains a list of remote Actors that have sent a Follow request and was
approved.

When you send a Create/Update/Delete activity to your outbox, followers
are notified on their inboxes.

Unauthenticated clients can request the followers collection and get
back just the totalItems for rendering in user interfaces. The owner of
the followers collection can make an authenticated request to get the
full list.


## Interacted

This is an out-of-spec and internal collection that keeps track of any
actor that has ever interacted with your activities, even if they don't
follow you anymore.

It helps the Social Inbox notify remote instances when an activity is
deleted.

## Handled activities

Activities the Social Inbox processes.

### Follow

When a Follow request is received, and is approved (either automatically
or manually), the Actor is added to the followers collection and the
Social Inbox sends out the activities from the outbox to backfill the
profile.

When the Follow request is rejected, the remote instance receives a
Reject activity.

### Create/Update

Create/Update activities are added to the Inbox when their actor is not
blocklisted.

When rejected, the Social Inbox will receive the activity, notify the
onRejected webhook, remove it from the Inbox, but otherwise won't notify
the remote instance with a Reject activity.

### Delete

When a Delete activity is received, the request is authenticated to the
actor, and both actors are compared. Once the actor is verified to be
the original author, the Delete activity gets auto-approved regardless
of the moderation status of the activity or its actor.

The Delete activity is added to the Inbox.  There's currently an [open
issue about deleting objects from the
inbox](https://github.com/hyphacoop/social.distributed.press/issues/101).

### Undo

An Undone activity is auto-approved regardless of moderation status and
removes the activity from the Inbox.  The actor is verified in the same
way as Delete activities.

If the Undo activity refered to a Follower, the Actor is removed from
the Followers collection.

### Like and Announce

Like and Announce activities are added to the Inbox.  When approved,
they're also added to the likes and shares collections of each activity.
The collections only return their contents for signed requests, total
items are public.

You can add these collections (plus replies) to your activities for
discovery, though we're not sure other implementations actually use
them.

The id of the activity is base64 encoded to prevent issues with
encoding.

Examples:

* Activity:
  [https://distributed.press/2025/03/21/build-your-censorship-resistant-donation-page.jsonld](https://distributed.press/2025/03/21/build-your-censorship-resistant-donation-page.jsonld)
* Shares: [https://social.distributed.press/v1/@distributed@distributed.press/inbox/shares/aHR0cHM6Ly9kaXN0cmlidXRlZC5wcmVzcy8yMDI1LzAzLzIxL2J1aWxkLXlvdXItY2Vuc29yc2hpcC1yZXNpc3RhbnQtZG9uYXRpb24tcGFnZS5qc29ubGQ=](https://social.distributed.press/v1/@distributed@distributed.press/inbox/shares/aHR0cHM6Ly9kaXN0cmlidXRlZC5wcmVzcy8yMDI1LzAzLzIxL2J1aWxkLXlvdXItY2Vuc29yc2hpcC1yZXNpc3RhbnQtZG9uYXRpb24tcGFnZS5qc29ubGQ=)
* Likes: [https://social.distributed.press/v1/@distributed@distributed.press/inbox/likes/aHR0cHM6Ly9kaXN0cmlidXRlZC5wcmVzcy8yMDI1LzAzLzIxL2J1aWxkLXlvdXItY2Vuc29yc2hpcC1yZXNpc3RhbnQtZG9uYXRpb24tcGFnZS5qc29ubGQ=](https://social.distributed.press/v1/@distributed@distributed.press/inbox/likes/aHR0cHM6Ly9kaXN0cmlidXRlZC5wcmVzcy8yMDI1LzAzLzIxL2J1aWxkLXlvdXItY2Vuc29yc2hpcC1yZXNpc3RhbnQtZG9uYXRpb24tcGFnZS5qc29ubGQ=)

## Replies

Like shares and likes, approved replies are also added to the replies
collection of every activity.

Example: [https://social.distributed.press/v1/@distributed@distributed.press/inbox/replies/aHR0cHM6Ly9kaXN0cmlidXRlZC5wcmVzcy8yMDI1LzAzLzIxL2J1aWxkLXlvdXItY2Vuc29yc2hpcC1yZXNpc3RhbnQtZG9uYXRpb24tcGFnZS5qc29ubGQ=](https://social.distributed.press/v1/@distributed@distributed.press/inbox/replies/aHR0cHM6Ly9kaXN0cmlidXRlZC5wcmVzcy8yMDI1LzAzLzIxL2J1aWxkLXlvdXItY2Vuc29yc2hpcC1yZXNpc3RhbnQtZG9uYXRpb24tcGFnZS5qc29ubGQ=)

## Parts you should implement yourself

When you're building your static site or fediverse client, some parts of
the ActivityPub spec need to be managed by you.

You can use one of the integrations or client libraries.

### Outbox (object)

The [outbox](https://www.w3.org/TR/activitypub/#outbox) is a collection
where your activities are stored.

We found that Mastodon doesn't pull this information, so it sits mostly
unused.  But it's nice to have available for spec compliance and
discovery.

Example: [https://distributed.press/outbox.jsonld](https://distributed.press/outbox.jsonld)

### Actor

The [Actor](https://www.w3.org/TR/activitypub/#actor-objects) is the
profile of your website on the Fediverse.

It links to collections like the Inbox and Outbox.

It also contains the public key that remote instances fetch to
authenticate requests from the Social Inbox.

Please note that the public key needs to be embedded on the Actor
itself, otherwise Mastodon and others won't be able to authenticate
requests.

Example: [https://distributed.press/about.jsonld](https://distributed.press/about.jsonld)

### Webfinger

When trying to convert a user mention like
`@distributed@distributed.press` into an Actor object, remote instances
will query the webfinger address.

Example: [https://distributed.press/.well-known/webfinger](https://distributed.press/.well-known/webfinger)

### Activities

If you want to send out interactions to remote instances, such as
notifying followers of a new post in a way it appears on their timeline,
you need to craft a Create/Update activity.

Though according to the spec the Create/Update can reference the object
(ie. a Note) by its id (URL), in practice Mastodon and other expect this
object to be embedded into the Create/Update itself, and won't
dereference it.

Example: [https://distributed.press/2025/03/21/build-your-censorship-resistant-donation-page/update/1742565433.jsonld](https://distributed.press/2025/03/21/build-your-censorship-resistant-donation-page/update/1742565433.jsonld)
